Add guide for connecting a debugger for python projects. (#726)
nitrictech/docs: docs/guides/python/debugging.mdx

---
description: 'How to debug Nitric Python applications locally'
tags:
  - Debugging
languages:
  - python
published_at: 2025-03-27
updated_at: 2025-03-27
---

# Debugging

> This guide will walk you through seting up local debugging for Nitric applications written in Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will walk you through setting up local debugging for Nitric applications written in Python.
```

> This guide will walk you through setting up local debugging for Nitric applications written in Python.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide will walk you through setting up local debugging for Nitric applications written in Python, using VSCode.
```

## Local Debugging with Python

> Debugging serverless-style applications can be challenging due to the way functions are triggered by events. For Python, [`debugpy`](https://github.com/microsoft/debugpy) is used to connect a debugger to the service while it runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Debugging serverless-style applications can be challenging due to the way functions are triggered by events. For Python, we can use [`debugpy`](https://github.com/microsoft/debugpy) to connect a debugger to the service while it runs.
```

> 
> Nitric's local environment behaves as closely as possible to the target cloud environment. While local debugging can help uncover many issues early, unit testing and integration testing are still strongly recommended prior to deploying to production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### 1. Modify the Python entry point

> Add the following lines to the top of the service file (e.g., `main.py`). This starts a debug server that the IDE can attach to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the following lines to the top of the service file (e.g., `services/api.py`). This starts a debug server that the IDE can attach to.
```

```python

> import debugpy

Reviewer 2: This needs to be added as a dependency first otherwise, adding these lines results in: import debugpy services/api.py: ModuleNotFoundError

host, port = debugpy.listen(("0.0.0.0", 52509))  # Static port for consistent debugging

> print(f"✅ Debugpy is listening on {host}:{port}", flush=True)

Reviewer 2: Should we do something to prevent this running in a deployed environment incase it's left in by mistake? A comment here and instructions at the end should also be added to explain that this code shouldn't be left in.

The guide should also explain how to do this if you have multiple services in a project (since copying this code would be problematic with the same port in all copies).

Author: Let's discuss how to address this.

```

> A **static port** (`52509`) is used so the IDE knows which port to connect to. Update the `launch.json` configuration to match this port before starting the debugger.

### 2. Update `nitric.yaml`

Modify the `start` command to include an auto-reloader and ensure Python does not use frozen modules, which can interfere with `debugpy`, E.g.

```yaml
name: message-board
services:
  - basedir: ''
    match: services/*.py
    runtime: python
    start: uv run -- watchmedo auto-restart -p "*.py" --no-restart-on-command-exit -R -- python -Xfrozen_modules=off $SERVICE_PATH
batch-services: []
websites: []
runtimes:
  python:
    dockerfile: ./python.dockerfile
    context: ''
    args: {}
```

> This configuration restarts the service on file changes and includes the necessary flags for debugging compatibility.

### 3. Configure `launch.json` in VS Code

> VS Code uses a launch.json file to define how it should start or attach to a debugging session. In this case, the debugger doesn't launch the application itself—it attaches to the running service that was started manually from the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VS Code uses a `launch.json` file to define how it should start or attach to a debugging session. In this case, the debugger doesn't launch the application itself—it attaches to the running service that was started manually from the terminal.
```

To create or update the launch.json file:

- Open the Run and Debug panel in VS Code (Ctrl+Shift+D or from the sidebar).
- Click "create a launch.json file" if one doesn't already exist.
- Choose "Python" when prompted for the environment.
- Replace the default configuration with the following:

```json
{
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "configurations": [
    {
      "name": "Python Debugger: Remote Attach",
      "type": "debugpy",
      "request": "attach",
      "connect": {
        "host": "localhost",
        "port": 52509
      },
      "pathMappings": [
        {
          "localRoot": "${workspaceFolder}",
          "remoteRoot": "."
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

> Ensure the `port` matches the value used in the `debugpy.listen()` call. If the port changes in the code, update it here as well.

### 4. Running the debugger

Start your nitric service with `nitric start` and start the debugger.

![vscode](/docs/images/guides/python-debugging/debugger.png)

In the Terminal, both the Nitric runtime output and the debugpy listener output will be visible, including the active debug port.

> In this example, a breakpoint has been hit on line 16 of `message_api.py`, within an HTTP handler for the `/messages` endpoint.

Reviewer 2: This comment feels out of context, since the structure of the application hasn't been mentioned before now

Author: Simplified to not describe existing project.

---
description: 'How to debug Nitric Python applications locally'
tags:
  - Debugging
languages:
  - python

> published_at: 2025-03-27

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
published_at: 2025-04-01
```

> updated_at: 2025-03-27

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
updated_at: 2025-04-01
```
